(follow-up to my components post)

The brave new world does raise another interesting puzzle, and neither Matt Waite, Sean Blanda, Matt Thompson or Ian Bicking seem to be talking about that. And that question is: what would the ideal CMS look like if our priority was to help us blend different components, instead of trying to do everything by itself as for example Drupal tries to be. Because existing CMSes aren't built for that kind of environment either.

First off: it'll be a vastly reduced role. Little apps are or will be taking care of all sorts of things that traditionally a CMS would do, like categorizing content and managing comments. In particular for newspapers, content creation will probably happen elsewhere, too, and in a platform-neutral way, because that way the same content that ends up in a CMS can also be used in print.

And secondly, the defining feature of a great content management system will no longer be how well it _manages_ content or even how easy it makes it to _produce_ content: we're taking care of that stuff elsewhere. Instead, the most important criterion in deciding the worth of a CMS is how well it can aggregate content from a ton of different places, how well it plays together with external apps, and how easy it is to apply a consistent visual theme to that content. "The home page is merely a master aggregation of this confederation" "as Matt Waite argues":http://www.niemanlab.org/2011/03/matt-waite-to-build-a-digital-future-for-news-developers-have-to-be-able-to-hack-at-the-core-of-the-old-ways/.

Among newspapers, The Guardian is perhaps furthest along the CMSless path: many parts of their website are driven by a whole bunch of search queries that fetch information from an internal search engine, which in turn grabs its content from an internal content creation tool (the vestige of what you'd traditionally call a CMS), plus a theming layer to display those search results in a pretty way.

So what the future needs are powerful content ingestion tools and quick and easy ways to display that content in the style that you want, not yet another CMS. That's what I'm betting on.