---
layout: post
language: en
categories:
  - personal
  - tech & society
title: Photography
---

Applications like Hipstamatic and Instagram work by playing a trick on our mind, in a good way. When we look at a painting or a drawing, we appreciate it for what it is. But when we look at a photo, with its uncanny resemblance to reality, it's easy to start judging the photo by how close it is to reality rather than by how _beautiful_ it is. So you're disappointed in the awful color balance, or upset that your cheap phone flash has made all your friends look like zombies yet again. Instagram and its kin, by making a photo _so bad_ that comparing it to reality would be a travesty, gets us to look at the moment in time the photograph actually represents. The people, not how they look. Your surroundings, not whether you actually got the black point and contrast right.

Deliberately degrading the image quality of a photo "annoys some people's sensibilities":http://koralatov.com/post/3603212545/photos, but it shouldn't. Photo filters encourage us to take photos even if we know they'll turn out ugly, because how they look is no longer the point. It allows you to take holiday snapshots without having to be apologetic about how you really know nothing about photography.

I appreciate photos from a Holga or Diana camera even more because of the physicality the reintroduce to taking pictures. Handling the film. Knowing that it's not only you that can mess up a photo — just as often it'll be the camera. Reveling in the sheer randomness of those cheap components. And the feeling of mastery when you get back those developed shots and find a couple of gems.

Yet I love my DSLR too, because I know I can take photographs in the most demanding situations, with hardly any light and everybody moving around, and they'll still come out looking great. And have gorgeous "bokeh":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bokeh, a photo manipulation if anything ever is, except that it happens in the lens, not in a digital circuit.

I think we're lucky to live in a time where we can take instant shots with a digital reflex camera that look superb, capture exactly we want to capture, and have gorgeous amounts of detail. I think we're even luckier to live in a time where we can purposefully choose to ignore those qualities, grab a smartphone, take a crappy picture and love it just as much because of what it signifies, because it's imbued with meaning.