---
layout: post
categories:
    - journalism
    - business & management
title: A new age of brands
---

Advertising is fucked. Our readers hate it, and marketeers are starting to hate it too. There are better ways to reach customers than with banners and billboards. And so ad spends are going down, down, down. Ninety percent of all discussions about new business models in media, beneath the surface, boil down to this: help me, advertising isn't paying the bills anymore.

Let me back up and explain the ad-supported business model of yore in a couple of sentences. The first thing to realize is that, since the 20th century or so, people have never been willing to pay for good journalism. A good newspaper is worth maybe half a cup of coffee, but certainly not more. Instead of begrudging the ignorance of the hoi polloi, newspaper execs sneakily redefined their business as selling eyeballs to advertisers. The pocket change you shlep out for a subscription is primarily meant to prove to advertisers that you actually care about what you're reading and won't just throw it away like a flyer or spam mail. Most newspapers get anywhere from fifty to eighty percent of their revenue from advertisements, and of course, free metro papers get _all_ of their revenue from ads.

When newspapers are actually a service to advertisers and not readers, a certain dynamic comes into play, a certain economic optimization: how can I, mister publisher, sell the most and the most expensive advertising, with the least amount of investment into good writing? If you can your senior city hall reporter and that costs you a hundred subscriptions, but it saves you $40,000 a year and doesn't really bother the advertisers, then why not? If advertorials are upsetting your readers, but not enough for them to actually switch to your competitor, then carry on.

You could cry and pout all day about how commercialism is destroying newspapers, but it is how it is: readers don't pay for journalism, advertisers do, so they hold the strings.

But here's the thing. Advertising is waning. A couple of percents each year, ad expenditures are going down. Or they're switching away from newspapers to other outlets. So we have to figure out a new business model. Getting people to actually pay for our content at full price is tricky. Even paywalls don't go that far, and merrily show you a shit-ton of ads even after you've paid over a hundred bucks for a year of digital access. But there are other solutions. Some organizations have reported great success with events they've organized, others are monetizing workshops that teach local businesses how to use social media, and yet others are asking us to sponsor their enterprise reporting.

All these new business models have something in common: they allow you to make money because people respect your newspaper, your brand. And the more they respect it, the better you can monetize it. The New York Times can sell a style guide to the general public but the Bozeman Daily Chronicle in Montana can't. You can teach businesses how to get their act together online, but not if your own website is shite. Your events can be the talk of the town (and cheap for you to organize, with all those journalists' rolodexes) or they can be "that pathetic thing our pathetic newspaper is pathetically trying to get us to attend". There's no reason for people to come to your "newsroom café":http://stevebuttry.wordpress.com/2011/10/18/opening-our-journal-register-newsrooms-to-the-community/ instead of any other bar unless they genuinely appreciate what you're doing.

"When copies are free, you need to sell things which can not be copied.":http://www.kk.org/thetechnium/archives/2008/01/better_than_fre.php Trust. Community. Fun.

When advertising slips below the symbolic 50% revenue line, news organizations will see that they have to start caring about their readers again. Not because the executives at the top aren't ice-cold capitalists, but because it'll make business sense again to make you, the reader, happy, while it didn't make business sense before, just like it doesn't make sense for airlines to make you happy.

When advertising wanes, selling a mediocre product for next to nothing to boost circulation is not a valid business model anymore, and instead, trusted brands gain in importance. Maybe in ten years, we can start being proud of the products we put out again.