---
layout: review
language: en
categories:
    - business & management
title: The E-Myth Revisited
author: Michael E. Gerber
---

It's been a couple of years ago now, at the height of my love and appreciation for self-help literature, that I read Michael Gerber's E-Myth. Horrible title, but Neil Giarratana had heartily recommended it during his talk at a Drupal conference in Washington DC, one of the best talks of the entire three days, so with that kind of an endorsement I just had to pick it up.

The E-Myth is a book for small-business entrepreneurs, helping your design agency or bakery or indie music label or small hotel better at what it does, while at the same time making you feel more relaxed at running that business instead of feeling like you have to slave away for 80 hours a week to accomplish anything at all. If that's the kind of spot you're in right now: the book really does help, go buy it. But I think the book is just as poignant for those of you who don't have your own business and don't want to start one either, because the essence of the book is really about _what modern businesses are like_, even big ones.

The main takeaway from the book is that you should run a business, any business, like a franchise. You should develop strict procedures for how everything gets done, so you can focus on the big picture, on the actual business strategy, rather than having to micromanage or having to do everything yourself because you don't trust others with complex operations.

...

The trouble with such a process- and rule-driven culture, of course, is that it kills all innovation: workers are supposed to work, managers are supposed to manage, and permission to think is the privilege of the board and the executive team. In a franchise, if an employee has a great idea, she'll have to sell it to upper management through a carefully defined employee feedback process — and of course you need a process for that! — instead of, y'know, just give it a go, rely on your wits to correct course and trying something else if where you end up is not where you wanted to be. Which has led to the almost absurd situations that make up a reality series like "Undercover Boss":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Undercover_Boss and what makes it so great to watch. Everybody recognizes the kind of disconnect between what executives cook up and what the people doing the real work actually experience and know.

But on the other hand, a process-driven culture can bring out the best in people. Because they never, ever have to worry about the little things like what they should start on first thing in the morning, where documents should live, how to talk to customers, when to call or when to e-mail a superior... so much mental energy that you used to spend on trifles can now be directed at stuff that's actually useful. And that's just a very useful realization even on a personal level: well-chosen routines and rituals allow you to glide through the boring parts of life on autopilot, leaving all your energy for the fun stuff.

And another interesting realization I've made over the years, both from personal experience when leading projects and what I've heard from friends: many, many people don't care the least bit about being in charge and would rather you just tell them the job you want them to do. You're not always helping by saying, "hey, this is a friendly, small, happy place to be and everybody is supposed to just do what they think is right for the business, so go forth and do cool stuff".

But then again, aren't the businesses we appreciate most, like 37signals and GitHub in the software industry, or the Anchor Brewing microbrewery (described with much love in Bo Burlington's Small Giants book) exactly those that are very picky about hiring and somehow manage to install a sense of shared purpose at every level of the organization?

Tricky.