Two different payment models have really impressed me lately: Kickstarter and Kindle.

"*Kickstarter*":http://www.kickstarter.com/ impresses me because it so potently shows the value of "authenticity":http://www.kk.org/thetechnium/archives/2008/01/better_than_fre.php. Artists and writers and journalists talk about the cool stuff they're working on, and their enthusiasm is simply contagious. On some pages, it's _hard_ not to contribute right away. In the past two or three months I've supported Run, Zombie, Run!, Texas Rose, Lauren Ipsum and Hello! cards.

My credit card is suffering, but that's a small price for that fuzzy warm feeling, the feeling that you're a part of something bigger.

But there's more to Kickstarter. Each project has a goal, the amount of money the artist needs to complete the work. You only pay when enough people chip in to reach the goal. As a commenter over at Hacker News said last month: they're hacking the tragedy of the commons. I would have never payed fifty dollars to support ?'s purchase of a big old letterpress without some kind of assurance that they'd actually use the money to pay for the press, and that they'd have enough backers to actually do that. Sending money into the void is uncool, and Kickstarter cleverly assures you that'll never happen. (Projects can fail of course, but nobody will ever just mysteriously disappear with your money.)

And then as the cherry on top, Kickstarter, after playing to our sense of wanting to belong to something bigger, after making us all excited about the project, make things just a little bit sweeter by applying to our selfish nature: _oh, by the way, if you sponsor this project you'll also get one of these very cool rewards._ And that seals the deal.

Kickstarter is just superb social design, and something news organizations, both non-profit and for-profit, can learn a lot from. We're used to doing the whole "without us, democracy is doomed" shtick, but scaremongering and overinflating our own importance rarely leads people to reach for their wallet. Telling people that they _should_ pay, because content is _valuable_ and they're a bunch of gosh darned freeloaders, well, nope, that doesn't help either. Getting people to care about your writers and their work, that's the first step. Make them _want_ to pay you.

Authenticity. Good-natured fun. Being part of something bigger. Getting appreciation for giving. Excitement. That's Kickstarter.

The Amazon "*Kindle and Kindle Store*" has a more traditional approach. In essence, they've made the whole purchasing and delivery process so frictionless that you're bound to do impulse buys: an age-old marketing trick. The good kind of impulse buys, mind you, the kind you end up loving more than you'd thought.

Even though it's based on simple impulse buying, Kindle is intriguing because the crucial second ingredient that it adds is that it gets you away from your computer. Reading on a computer is either a harried experience or a part of wanderings across the web that go anywhere and everywhere, with constant distractions from your email, your Facebook and your twitter accounts. I've noted before that "an environment like that":http://stdout.be/2011/10/18/the-five-minute-news-break/ isn't conducive to getting people to buy anything at all, no matter how frictionless. With a Kindle, you get the good old-fashioned reading experience of a paperback or a good magazine, which is just the kind of relaxed emotional state publishers want you to be in when peddling their wares. It's leaning back in a comfy chair that gets you buying, and it's the great e-ink reading experience that keeps you buying.

Another way Kindle works (for me) is through hypercuration. Let's face it, even news curators don't help us a lot with information overload, because we just end up using ten different curators in addition to a ton of "regular" content providers and then there's those endless tweets to keep track of too. Curation adds to the overdose instead of making it easier to grapple with.

Magazines and Singles on Kindle battle information overload with a good dose of retro: just pick a magazine you like (my favorite thus far is Slate), buy it for a buck or so, sit down, trust in their selection, read it from cover to back and feel happy that, despite the deluge of information out there, you've managed to read a very fine selection of stories indeed, and managed to finish them. (Finishability is the next big thing, I feel it.) Yes, those same stories, even more of them in fact, are available online for free, but that's not the point. The experience is different, and the return to editors as gatekeepers, while it'd be a stupid move online, is a refreshing experience away from keyboard. Sometimes we _do_ need to act like digital space is expensive, even though it's free.

The Kindle lesson is: go beyond the content you offer, and think of the experience you're trying to create, and which platforms will help you to create that experience. The corollary to that lesson is that we, as an industry, are still clueless about how people are reading the news, when they're enjoying it and when not. We need more ethnographic reports like those from the AP and more of our own research. Not to figure out what people think they need or like, but even more basic than that: how do they act when at home, what do their days and evenings look like, and how could our products fit into those routines.

Kickstarter and Kindle are fascinating platforms that news organizations can leverage and profit from. But they're also _models_ that we can learn from. Make payment frictionless, think about the experience and not just the content you're selling, make people feel a part of something bigger, don't force people to pay but infect them with your own enthusiasm and passion so they _want_ to pay, and realize that  hypercuration and finishability are not obstacles but selling points.