As much as I love new stuff, I'm your archetypical late adopter. I don't have a smartphone and I don't think I'll ever get a tablet. I started using twitter just a couple of months ago. My MP3 player is seven years old and it's not an iPod. I started using the Delicious bookmarking tool just at the moment everybody decided social bookmarking was _passé_. I write all my blogposts in TextEdit.

* deciding which tools to use in journalism is very easy too: first, you try out all kinds of new formats and approaches to see what your audience responds too — but you can do 90% of that stuff with just a plain blog and some basic tools, it's more about how you engage with your audience — and then wait until the frustrations crop up. "God, I wished I could do X because it would really help with reporting about Y and Z." It's almost become a cliché, but I believe the biggest transformation we have to go through now is that journalists have to learn to be reporters, producers and community hosts all at once and they're not used to that. The fact that most newsrooms are working with outdated technology and that most reporters can't use twitter pales in comparison to that bigger challenge — many reporters aren't very good at interacting with their audience through email either, so it's not about the tools but about willingness.

So my process for choosing technology is to not go through a process like that at all. It's fun to sometimes take a look at a technology and play around with ideas for how you could use it — find problems for your solution. And so I'll take time to explore any kind of technology or app I see, but that's something else from trying to instantly push it to journalists. But most of the time, problems in journalism dictate what kind of tech we need. Hence my emphasis on catching up and improving our CMSes and basic tools rather than going all overboard with the latest platform.

Anyhow, when choosing platforms I do have a few rules:

* External service? Hm. Has no API or no data you can get out of it or into it? Hmmmmmm.
* ....

> How do you decide to dedicate time to a new tool/platform/gadget? What is the process you go through mentally? And then later – how do you convince others to go through that process? And, last: How do you ensure that the tools you do adopt are used once the “newness” factor fades?

For the carnival

* finding technologies that make you more able to take on new challenges, rather than painting you into corners (due to keeping your data for themselves, ...)
* experiment from the very start, but when productizing and monetizing, make sure you won't be the one to pay the pioneer tax. Getting people to try out something new is hard as hell. Getting people to try a new flavor of something they've long loved is much easier. First mover isn't always an advantage.
* Opportunity costs. I agree with Steve Buttry, for example, that there are lots of opportunities in the mobile sphere. But, at nine out of ten news organizations, particularly ones that have been around for a while and maybe slow to adapt to new technologies and writing, there are usually ten other projects you could be doing that would have more value (both short- and long-term) than being bullish on mobile.