---
title: Lobbying for open data
language: en
categories:
    - tech & society
summary: There are lots of institutional and technical barriers that prevent ubiquitous open data. Here's the 10 most important ones.
---

Just got back from "a get-together here in Ghent":http://www.gentm.be/ about open data. "Bart Rosseau":http://twitter.com/#!/BartRosseau outlined a lot of reasons why data seems so easy to open up, but hardly ever is. It reminded me of a "Hack de Overheid":http://www.hackdeoverheid.nl/ brainstorm session I led about a year ago titled "How to lobby governments to open up their data?" I'd almost forgotten about that session, but I actually took some pretty detailed notes. Because late is better than never, I figured I'd dig up those notes. For your edification: "why open data is so hard".

h3. (1) There's no incentive

Civil servants often have no incentive whatsoever to make their data more freely available, or to start thinking about metadata and digitization. 

More data makes for more accountability. More ways their superiors and the general public can keep tabs on them. And while most civil servants appreciate the general sentiment that transparency is A Good Thing, they're not about to open up themselves to a flood of scrutiny unless they've got the unwavering support of their superiors and some kind of incentive to make things happen.

Open data is used by app developers and curious citizens, but also by journalists looking for misschief and aberrations, which, after all, is their job. While most of the open data projects I've seen are all about making cities more liveable, we go wherever the data leads us, and that can sometimes mean biting the hand that feeds us.

For some agencies, open data and "FOI":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freedom_of_information_legislation requests must seem like two sides of the same — very unwelcome — coin. Henk van Ess says he wouldn't be surprised if departments with more-than-adequate IT support actually go the extra mile to make their data _harder_ to understand, for example by printing it out on a stack of paper rather than making it available through the web. 

Our goals sometimes diverge from those of our governments. We can't solve the root of that problem, but we can emphasize how open data can save departments time and money, lead to good publicity and help civil cervants better do their jobs. At the same time, we should lobby for more stringent Freedom of Information laws.

Open data fiends within governments should allow their department to take things one step at a time. First get departments to start thinking more data-centrically, because it benefits internal knowledge management. Then let them open up some datasets to other departments. Then maybe tell the public that you have datasets available on request (leaving departments with a choice about who they grant access). After going through all those steps, you've created a different environment and one in which more people will feel inclined to open things up entirely.

h3. (2) Nobody gets excited about data

Since open data is still so new, government workers don't readily see the benefits. We need to get these guys and girls excited about open government and the incredible things that it can accomplish for citizens and neighborhoods.

Whenever we request a specific dataset, we should try our very best to make a good impression and entice the decision makers through prototypes and sketches. "Okay, if we had this data about X in JSON with these annotations, we could make something like..."

Even better, though, as Annemarie van Campen and Martin Borman from "verseoverheid.nl":http://www.verseoverheid.nl/ mentioned, is when you can get a foot in the door with a working, simple service built on top of existing data. You'll usually have to scrape it or even collect a minimal dataset by hand, so it's hard work, but a "tangible demo":http://www.mattwaite.com/posts/2009/apr/27/key-lesson-i-learned-building-politifact-demos-not/ makes for to-the-point discussions. These things _will_ get people inside of the government talking and eager to help out. Few people care about open data, but most people know a good thing when they see it.

Governments themselves can easily ignite discussions and get both their staff and their citizens thinking about open data through challenges and prizes, like  "Apps for Democracy":http://www.appsfordemocracy.org/ and "NYC BigApps":http://nycbigapps.com/.

It will also be crucial to bring the believers within government together, so they'll feel less like lonely renegades, but also in order to make them more visible to their colleagues across departments and across municipalities. Nobody can explain the benefits of open data to a civil servant better than one of his peers. So we need to make sure these conversations are happening, and that the excitement spreads from within these beacons within the government. Existing social networks like "Ambtenaar 2.0":http://www.ambtenaar20.nl/ in the Netherlands and "Govloop":http://www.govloop.com/ in the States definitely help.

h3. (3) Messy data abound

While many bigger cities have data guys in many different places, with titles like "GIS expert" or "business analyst", just as often often you'll find civil servants collecting and registering a cornucopia of data because it's mandated by law. But these records are usually mandated to allow for auditing by humans, not with the purpose of making them easy to use in statistical software or by computers. 

Data doesn't mean to _them_ what it means to _us_. Why keep a data set clean if you're not actually using it for anything anyway? We love JSON, would get giddy about RDF and take a CSV without a second thought, but civil servants usually don't know that that's the sort of data which is easier to work with and build on.

Just as important, few government agencies are using Creative Commons licenses, or have legal departments that are unfamiliar with opening up datasets. Yet without liberal licenses on both content and data, open data can't work.

Organizations lobbying for open governments and open data should provide solid documentation about formats, licensing, keeping data up to date and producing clean data. It's easier for governments to indulge our requests if we take the guesswork out of it.

We also need to convince governments that data is not either "usable" or otherwise "too messy to use". What's important for us when we tinker with data is that we _know_ the quality of the data: how was it gathered, are there potential errors amongst the data, when was it gathered and when will it be out-of-date? But we want to be able to decide for ourselves how good the data actually has to be, to be usable. It differs a lot depending on exactly how we intend to use the data.

As a side note, though, while we should accept that the data streams we get  won't always be as clean as we'd like, pushing for cleaner data _is_ important. Not just because it's more convenient for us, but because, as Henk van Ess told us during the brainstorm, the the messy, incomplete data government departments are scared of giving to us is going to be exactly the same data they will use to inform their superiors and the data those superiors in turn will use to inform politicians. We should take things slow, but if a long-term effect of the movement towards more open data is that we can thereby indirectly increase the quality of that data, it'll be better able to aid policy-making. A nice bonus.

h3. (4) Data isn't always where we think it is

Cartographical data may be licensed from commercial firms. Data that seems local may be the province or county's prerogative. Believers may have access to data and in some cases a legal obligation to give it to whoever asks for it, but may still have to go through multiple layers of superiors before actually being given the go-ahead to open something up. For governments, open is never the default, and it's not uncommon to see departments err on the side of secrecy, not out of ill will, but out of caution.

Data also isn't where we think it is in another way. One participant to our brainstorm lamented that "The people you usually get on the phone are entirely clueless, but maneuver your way to the IT guy, and if you're a little bit lucky they'll happily provide you with whatever data you want in whatever format you want." Getting your hands on data sometimes means bypassing the usual channels and getting your hands on unlisted phone numbers. Not uncommonly, agencies and departments only become uncomfortable about sharing data if you give them too much time to think on it and worry about unrealistic consequences.

h3. (5) Open is the opposite of in control

If you open up data to the world and make sure everybody has the rights to use it for whatever kind of project they want, _some_ people are going to do stupid things.

Data, especially if it wasn't explicitly gathered with the intent to use it in compiling statistics or opening it up, can be sketchy or incomplete. While unpolished data is bothersome to the users of said data, most of us would prefer some kind of data over none at all, and figure out for ourselves whether it's usable — which often differs depending on what you intend to use it for, like whether we're searching for trends or need individually accurate data points, say, coordinates to put on a map.

For the publisher of that data, though, the thought of opening up datasets that are begging for misinterpretation or that might lead to complaints from unsatisfied users, is not a very happy one. You can't be unhappy about what you don't know exists.

While open data is all about removing barriers, the open data movement shouldn't necessarily be opposed to the idea of data that's covered by an end-user license agreement, as long as that EULA only limits mischief, not legitimate use.

If it'd make governments feel more at easy, maybe the open data community could police itself and point out misuses of data. In all honesty, though, I've yet to encounter the first "data crime".

Privacy concerns also commonly crop up in discussions about open data. Civil servants need more information about all the applicable regulations, and the tools to easily and reliably anonimize potentially sensitive data. Perhaps data users can lend a hand, collecting regulations and their implications for data release in a community-maintained wiki. Not a replacement for a good lawyer, but it could clear up common misunderstandings. 

h3. Summed up

If you're working for the government and care about open data, you should evangelize and connect the digital natives and believers in open data within your organization. Excite both developers and civil servants with Apps for Democracy events, which showcase the power of what open data can accomplish in even as little as a few hours or days of coding.

If you're a citizen, journalist or working at a company that would benefit from open data, you need to put continued pressure on governments to be more open about what they do, and do it better, but in the short term what you need is a toolbelt of negotiation techniques that allow you to get your hands on as of yet undisclosed data. The key is getting in touch with the right people (more often IT guys than somebody from public relations) and getting them excited with what you can do for them. Have a demo you can show? Excellent. And if you think you'll be doing this often, keep a contact database and map out who's responsible for which datasets.

The lobbying is still very much up to you, but it definitely doesn't hurt to have a general idea of the forces at play and the different reasons that make opening up data as slow a process as it is. _Confer supra._