---
language: en
layout: post
title: The baneful administrator
categories:
    - journalism
    - business & management
summary: Industries in decline need a different kind of manager than industries that are stable. What the news industry needs now are entrepreneurs, not administrators.
---

There is one simple reason that explains why newsmedia are having such a tough time: imploding advertising revenue. It truly is the single biggest reason why our industry is in decline, and it's a force that is outside of our immediate control. But if there's one big reason we're doing down, there are twenty different reasons that are preventing us from crawling back to our feet and thriving, even when opportunities abound.

One is mismanagement, but a more significant one is _mismatched_ management. We have very good people in charge, it's just that they're no longer good at the things this economy needs them to be good at.

A word about mismanagement first.

The reason mid-level management and executives so often get away with mismanagement is because it simply doesn't matter very much. It's annoying but it does limited damage. As long as you're turning a profit, who cares?

As I noted in a comment to Jonathan Krim on my blog a while back, many an industry is full of mediocre companies and nevertheless does just fine. Indeed, capitalism is hardly so mercenary and industries where only the very best thrive are rare – the music industry is the only one that comes to mind. Conversely, nobody's happy with their wireless provider but those providers have no problem staying in business.

Back in 1992, "Warren Buffett explained":http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1991.html to Berkshire Hathaway shareholders exactly why ineptitude isn't a big deal in some industries. A company providing an essential (not just nice-to-have) service without any good substitute can:

bq. regularly price its product or service aggressively and thereby to earn high rates of return on capital. Moreover, franchises can tolerate mis-management. Inept managers may diminish a franchise’s profitability, but they cannot inflict mortal damage.

Newspapers used to be pretty much the only information source people had access to, except for a drip feed from TV newscasts, and it also used to be a uniquely easy way to access lots of readers, interesting to both advertisers, people selling or buying stuff and for governments to communicate important public service announcements. In 1985 Buffett said: "But even a poor newspaper is a bargain to most citizens simply because of its “bulletin board” value."

So if we're worried about mismanagement, our worry is actually a symptom of a bigger problem. If you think about what Buffett said, it means our industry no longer provides an essential service without "substitutes":http://stdout.be/2012/05/04/fungible/.

But mismanagement is not nearly as important as mismatched management.

I don't doubt for a second that some newspaper companies are going to die because they're mismanaged. But I actually think most companies and most people working for those companies deserve more credit than that. It's not mismanagement, it's just that the management we have is no longer the management we need. Efficient but no longer effective.

News organizations have for a very long time been managed by what you could call administrators: people who are really good at keeping things going, but not that good at figuring out new, cheaper and better ways to do things. Don't imagine these people to be dullards: they're good at negotiating contracts, keeping the budget under control and putting out fires. They were and are smart enough to balance what readers want with what readers need. Administrators are also the ones you need to pull off complicated endeavors like the mergers and acquisitions so common in the 20th century from the 70s onwards. But administrators are not creative and they're not paid to be creative. They were not hired to be bold, they were hired to be the exact opposite of bold: steady, intelligent, dependable.

People can have many talents, but most of us are better at some things and worse at others. Creative types are not often diligent administrators. Venture capitalists often remark that startups require a different kind of executive than established companies, which explains why founders often hand over the reins to seasoned executives when their baby's grown up. Likewise, stable industries require a different kind of manager than an industry in flux. In a stable industry, it makes sense to hire administrators and eschew entrepreneurs. (It also makes sense to hire consultants for anything and everything beyond the day-to-day. A stable industry doesn't need that kind of expertise often enough to bring it in-house.)

Of course, stable industries don't stay stable forever. Suddenly your biggest revenue stream (advertising) goes to shit while your second-biggest revenue stream (subscriptions) has been in decline for half a century, and you realize your company is staffed with very loyal and talented people that have pushed your company to unseen heights, the very drivers of your success... and they're suddenly useless. Unequiped to handle the challenges ahead.

So we're not innovating at the pace that we should be. There's maybe five news websites on the entire face of the earth that don't make me puke, and it's not just the design but the fact that they do nothing to encourage exploration, provide no context, have awful search engines and are infested with low-quality ads. Most of all, they make no money.

Now is not the time to hire industry veterans even if they have all the right credentials and an amazing network. (Yes, New York Times Company, I'm looking at you and your new CEO.) Now is the time to hire entrepreneurs.

Beware of mismanagement, but beware of mismatched management even more.