---
layout: comment
language: en
title: News articles as assets and paths
canonical: http://buzzmachine.com/2012/05/26/news-articles-assets-paths/#comment-542607790
categories:
    - journalism
    - information architecture
context: Jeff Jarvis did a post recently thinking about how we can improve the news article by re-envisioning it as assets and paths that link those assets together, giving experienced readers a short path to the juicy parts and people new to the issue a context-rich experience with lots of background and explainer-type assets. It's an intriguing concept, but I don't think it does justice to the complexity involved in serving a diverse audience with varying levels of knowledge and many different perspectives.
---

I don't know about this, Jeff. I don't think assets and paths really get at the core of the issue.

Before you even start reading something, the first question you subconsciously ask is: should I care about this, is this something for me? Most people never come into contact with stories they don't understand, because it's easier to just skip over headlines that look weird.

The Facebook IPO bypassed a lot of people's natural reflex to not read things we think we won't understand, because (1) people are interested in Facebook in general and (2) the media has been hyping up this thing to no end without really considering whether it's actually an important topic for a mainstream audience, leading people to consider reading a business story they otherwise simply wouldn't touch.

But, okay, let's continue the journey: people click through to the story. They see stuff they don't understand. Terminology. What went before. Context. Why it matters. Ouch. Definitely, let's try to find ways to fix that that don't annoy readers that are more experienced with the subject.

At the same time, we'll have to find a way to make people comfortable with the fact that we're essentially presenting them with "hey, here's the 10-step, 45-minute process you need to go through to understand this story." I'm at work, on my lunch break, and I don't even care about business journalism all that much, so bugger off.

But once we've solved the background knowledge problem *and* found a way to get people onto the page and keep them on it without them getting overwhelmed and fleeing, once we do all that, we will find that there's a second and equally large stumbling block: different audiences care about the same topics for different reasons, and need a story that aligns with their perspective for things to really click.

Take the Nieman Lab for example, or your blog or mine. There's no way to intelligently chunk up that content (whether or not it's mixed up with external sources) to suit both people who have never heard about the challenges of digital media and those that have. These articles and posts are written from a certain perspective with a certain audience in mind, and that perspective is part of the writing, the individual asset, not something you can change by creating a different path through chunks of content. Unless you turn the path itself into a bonafide piece of content. In which case you've just created a well-researched story with links, not used the hyperlink to create a new story form.

The idea of treating stories like assets and paths only really comes to life in a scenario where the same pool of assets could be used in many different paths. While I can see some of that happening (it does already), my gut feeling is that to really serve our users well, it takes more than a custom path, it takes tailored assets too. There's overlap and there are opportunities to avoid duplicated efforts, I'm just not sure the potential wins are huge.

Also, I wonder whether people really get as annoyed by background paragraphs as you fear they do. I just read a story somewhere that explained to me that CPM, in the context of advertising, stands for cost per mille. Does that bother me? No. I glance over it and go to the next paragraph. In fact, repeating obvious and well-known information is a literary device that's often used in non-fiction, to establish a shared world before diving into the deep. It gets annoying if there's a ton of that stuff, but in that case, I should have probably skipped the whole thing anyway.

Lastly, consider that the idea of assets and paths is what defines Delicious stacks, Bitly bundles and MentorMob playlists. I'd be interested to hear how you would move beyond those forms towards something that can really be a reinvention of the article.

It's a really complex problem.

What does excite me is the fact that we're thinking about this at all – and Jay Rosen, Matt Thompson have written excellent posts about "the future of context" that date back as far as two years ago, to which we can now add your contribution.

As you rightly point out, who cares if the post-article is something of a kludge and imperfect. The only thing that really matters is whether it's better than what we have right now. It can't be hard to beat the article.