---
layout: post
language: en
title: Are professional standards a good thing?
summary: Businesses and professionals are never really slaves to the market. There's some wiggle room. Wiggle room that elevates professions and makes us ignorant at the same time.
---

John Cage's 4'33" is a composition in three movements, for any instrument or ensemble and it consists of four minutes and thirty three seconds of silence. Cage considers it to be his most important work.

People think 4'33" is a joke. Some love it because composing four minutes of silence _is_, you have to admit, a ballsy, whimsical, out-there thing to do. A musical joke. Equally as many think it's preposterous and doesn't qualify as music or as art, a joke in that sense. But there are listeners who consider it to be much more than that. Usually those who know its history and philosophy, often musicians or composers. For those admirers, 4'33" is one of the most important compositions of the 20th century.

Art is meant to be consumed but it is also meant to be created. Those who consume it pay a moment of attention and then move on with their lives, but those who create it obsess about their art night and day. Same thing with critics. Asymmetry in consumption inevitably leads artists' and critics' tastes to move beyond those of their audience. The artists get bored and try new things and the critics were hankering for something new and are glad to finally have it. The audience, observers from afar, might be less enthralled. Right or wrong, this is why "so many people hate modern art":http://www.vice.com/read/i-dont-get-art but dote on renaissance works crafted under the watchful eye of a patron-dilettante. ("Create art I enjoy or starve.")

This rift in the tastes of creators and the tastes of consumers can happen in every creative endeavor. Sometimes sheer market forces heals the rift: you may want to publish a book containing nothing but the first ten-thousand prime numbers, and you certainly can, but nobody will buy it. Sometimes reality does: when building a bridge, you don't get to use your own kind of physics. But most creative industries allow for a certain amount of play, professional standards that your users or clients might not care about but that don't upset them either.

Journalism is a good example.

Every journalist and every newspaper vows to uphold professional ethics mandating accuracy and fairness even though a good chunk of readers wouldn't mind reading more gossip and seeing more sleazy celeb photos. Newspapers tend to spend more pages on politics and international news than the average reader cares to see, because it's important.

Journalism also illustrates why professional standards are not always a boon. News websites, the vast majority of them, look like ransom notes. Three columns and five layers of information stacked on top of each other when "all we want is a friggin' stream":http://dashes.com/anil/2012/08/stop-publishing-web-pages.html. Mobile is even worse. Someone somewhere decided news websites should look pretty, when really they don't.

Directors get to pick unhappy endings, politicians can ignore the "tyranny of the masses":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tyranny_of_the_majority, a good chef may refuse to cook a steak well done and a poet may write for you and me or they may write for the world's English professors.

Capitalism is a harsh master but contrary to popular opinion she does not often cut throats. There's wiggle room. Consumers – users, readers, music lovers, foodies – can be conservative or unsophisticated or wrong and when they are we have the power to ignore them. But we must recognize that power as the mixed blessing it is. Maybe it's you and me who need an education.