---
layout: post
language: en
title: Paywalls
---


It's been a ton of fun, these past two weeks, seeing Howard Owens, David Simon and Ryan Chittum arguing about paywalls and generally just acting like a bunch of small children. I've said it before and I'll say it again: journos are the worst comment trolls.

(Don't expect me to add anything new. It's all been said before. Just musing a bit.)

The discussion of whether readers ought to pay for journalism has always been a heated one. It has a moral undertone: readers who don't pay are freeriders, and papers who charge are abandoning their service to the community to turn a quick buck.

But the paywall discussion has been an insightful one too. Steve Yelvington from Morris Communications has written about "how porous paywalls manage to monetize your true fans and heavy users":http://www.yelvington.com/content/thinking-about-paywall-read-first without chasing away everyone else. Clay Shirky "has detailed":http://www.shirky.com/weblog/2009/03/newspapers-and-thinking-the-unthinkable/ some of the nuances that make it easier for some business to charge than others, like why micropayments work for iTunes but not necessarily for us. Ken Doctor "has studied":http://www.niemanlab.org/2011/10/the-newsonomics-of-piano-media/ what Piano Media is doing in Slovakia and other small, non-English speaking countries. Steve Outing wrote about how similar metered paywalls are to "the freemium model":http://steveouting.com/2012/06/08/its-not-a-paywall/.

If you can look past the "quasi-religious zeal":http://www.cjr.org/the_audit/owenss_straw_man_army.php?page=all, you'll find all sorts of people trying to make sense of when paywalls can work and when they can't, instead of talking in absolutes. Even if you don't much like paywalls for reasons beyond the financial, and I have to admit that I'm certainly in that category, we should all be trying to learn more about the economics of news publishing. We know much too little and our industry suffers for it.

Anyway. Ryan Chittum argues that the question is settled and that paywalls have unequivocally been shown to work. I'm inclined to say he's right. After all, with a metered paywall, there's bound to be at least one way of tweaking the dials and setting up the pricing that, at the very least, doesn't _lose_ money.

Ah, but there's the rub! Paywall proponents _used to say_ (they don't anymore) that paywalls would save the industry, that they'd be a solution to the crisis. Paywall opponents _used to say_ (they don't anymore) that paywalls would be the death of any newspaper company that implemented them.

Instead, we've all come to realize that charging for access online has many facets. One side has softened its visions of doom, the other has lowered its expectations.

You may think Ryan Chittum is disingenuous for saying that paywalls "work" when what he really means is that they can bring in some pocket money, maybe keep print alive for a year or two longer. After all, an industry in decline shouldn't snuff at any kind of revenue, we need to take what we can get. But what's really happened is that he's adjusted his expectations, just like the rest of us, and you can't blame someone for that.

What Ryan doesn't know, or doesn't want to know, is that his opponents have changed too. He finds himself arguing against people who say paywalls are not a good _model_ for the news industry. That statement is more subtle than it sounds, because what it means is that only under very specific circumstances can paywalls actually bring in the sort of money we'll need to sustain our newsrooms long-term, not that it can never bring in any money at all. And when paywall opponents say that readers have never paid for journalism, what they really mean is that readers have never footed the majority of the bill, they're not trying to deny newspaper subscriptions out of existence.

People on both sides of the fence have gotten a bit milder, and instead of saying, "isn't it grand, how much more nuanced our thinking has become?" we're using people's old opinions as ammunition to attack their new ones. Well, that's not very nice now is it?

I don't think paywalls are wrong, but there are "so many other issues":http://stdout.be/2012/06/18/the-news-industry-and-its-problems/ I'd rather talk about. Chief of which is the underlying problem: why is it so hard to make money with media? Why can even the most finely tuned paywalls and the very best news sites entice no more than a percent or all readers to become paying customers? That's what I would like to figure out.

-------

Glut certainly has to do with it: supply goes up and prices go down. Unbundling too, which is making the cross-subsidization that defined our industry impossible. But that begs the question: why do we need to use profits from things that aren't news to fund things that are? There are not many but there are a few examples of things that hold value but that people somehow seem reluctant to pay for. We grudgingly pay half a buck for a public toilet visit. ... There are also a few examples of things that consistently provide a low value, but that we keep buying. ----

A part of me just thinks that the value proposition is wrong. Thinking about paywalls, then, to me is like thinking about ---. And the model is wrong. Does it really take 

Implementing a paywall, no disagreement with Ryan there, doesn't preclude you from innovating. But as a heuristic for figuring out which companies are throwing in the towel and have said "fuck it, we just don't get this digital bullshit," it works pretty well.

The reason I love the community around the future of news so much is because all of our sharing and writing and bickering has lead us to learn more about journalism – its practice and the business to support it – in the past five years than in the fifty that preceded it. And the paywall discussion is actually a good example of that: from blanket approval or disapproval in the late nineties to both more nuanced views on what can work and what cannot as well as more subtle, smarter implementations. Exactly how things should be.

---

So here I must confess I agree with Howard Owens. Who wants to be talking about squeezing a little money out of our entire audience if maybe the entire way we're doing things is wrong, if we have to fundamentally rethink what it means to be a news organization in the 21st century. If we're happy with new revenue sources that are inconsequential, it's not so much about the money as it is about learning about how this new world works. If we have to wait for the world to teach us, it'll be too late.