---
layout: post
title: Local newspapers, news deserts and simple stuff
language: en
categories:
    - journalism
    - business & management
summary: Do we really read newspapers for the investigative reporting?
---

Local newspapers are not very likely to disappear anytime soon. Quasi-monopolies and all that. If they do, we will miss their watchful eye, but I contend we will miss the "simple stuff":http://blogs.reuters.com/felix-salmon/2010/09/17/teaching-journalists-to-read/ more.

Simple stuff?

The events calendar. A heads-up on diners and stores that are newly open for business, holding a sale, advertising a lunch special or calling it quits. The weather and cancellations. Milestones and obituaries. A local club asking people to come to their bake sale. A message from the government that there's still a couple of urban gardening plots available, first-come first-served. The police blotter. Classifieds. Business listings. Consumer journalism, is what some people call it.

Sometimes we get fancy with our community journalism and do a restaurant review, a feature on a local charity handing out sandwiches to kids from poorer neighborhoods, a top five things to do next weekend, so that takes time. And there's always gardening to do. Take the local theater, for example. For some weird reason they don't want to put their stuff on our calendar, so we have someone on staff do that instead. And press releases from the hospital invariably need some tender loving care, because you wouldn't want to see them unedited. But it's not a ton of work, really. It's simple stuff.

Community news is generally _reported as received_. Are you really going to fact-check that the Fieldhouse will be open next weekend for the Freedom Festival, when they say they will be? Small business owners can be overly promotional when you hand them a microphone, but you can't really put a spin on the schedule for Tuesday Band Nights. More than that, community news is only reported _when_ received. If you don't want to tell us about the flea market you're organizing, so be it.

When the local newspaper spreads news from across the community, it acts as platform and publisher, not as source and hardly ever as gatekeeper. When a business owner tells us about a tasting they're doing next week and a local high school passes along graduation photos, there's really not much value a journalist can add to that aside from getting that information to its intended audience.

Before the web, and even when the web had come along but wasn't yet as pervasive as it is now, it made perfect sense for newspapers, not cities or non-profits or private individuals, to provide the public with its local bulletin board. Newspapers are the experts at putting information on paper and getting it distributed to pretty much the entire community for hardly any money at all. Everyone's happy and it's one less thing for the city communications department to worry about.

And once a newspaper has been established as the go-to place for local information, it will stay the community's go-to place for a long while. People only submit news to places that have readers, and people will get their information where there's a lot of it, so once you have an established market position, network effects will gradually turn that market position into a monopoly, one that's really hard to break.

But truly, there's no divine law nor any practical argument to explain why newspapers would be the preferred distributor of community information. It could be a community-supported non-profit, or a subsidized one. Or it could be twenty people at the city or county communications department.

And not all community information has to be taken care of by the same people. It could be one guy in his pajamas who set up a WordPress blog and a community forum on a GoDaddy server, and a particularly well connected sharehappy town crier on Facebook who always has the low-down on where the best bands are playing, and that community calendar could be a civil servant's pet project. Maybe a bunch of concerned citizens get together and set up a "SeeClickFix":http://seeclickfix.com/ for their city. Or maybe nobody's in charge, but every local business has its own Facebook page and people keep up to date that way.

Notices and news from the community are useful, require zero journalistic effort or intervention and can be published with free off-the-shelf software. You no longer have to be a newspaper to do it.

In Flanders, Belgium, where I'm from, the government-sponsored "CultuurNet":http://www.cultuurnet.be/ publishes the biggest and best community calendars there are. Not eBay but the privately run "2dehands.be":http://www.2dehands.be/ is where most people go to find classifieds. Except if you're looking for members to join your rock band, in which case you'd go to "the website of Humo":http://www.humo.be/zoekertjes/muzikanten, a weekly magazine.

Newspapers still dominate when it comes to providing community news, though there's a successfull "city blog":http://www.gentblogt.be/ with a wide roster of contributors and all my favorite bars in "Ghent":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ghent have Facebook pages I subscribe to. The city blog is an especially good source for restaurant reviews, which is more than welcome because nobody ever uses Yelp or Foursquare. There's also "het caféplan":http://www.cafeplan.be/ run by the nonconformist Edmond Cocquyt and his cronies, wonderfully complete overviews of every bar in every major city in Flanders.

There's no website with local business listings (beyond bars) I'd recommend, but there must be at least five crappy ones. If I wanted to refresh my swing dancing moves, I'd be inclined to search for a class on the "WiSPER":http://www.wisper.be website, and that organization is private but subsidized.

For the best coverage of Ghent's epic 10-day city festival, you should visit "Tim Van der Mensbrugghe's personal blog":http://mensbrugghe.be/, a journalist and old colleague of mine.

If I had a brunch coming up and wanted to find a good bakery, I probably wouldn't visit any site at all but just ask my friends on Facebook or call my mom.

You can do the same exercise for wherever it is you live, and you will find – or I hope you will find – a rich and growing ecosystem of local information providers. And all across the spectrum: philantrophical, subsidized, hobby ventures, state-run, for-profit, and social.

Indulge me, forget about enterprise reporting for a while. Pretend you're in a one-paper city, and pretend that city can't sustain its paper anymore. Because cities and their citizens have ceded so much territory to newspapers, the immediate result will be that you'll end up with a "news desert":http://www.niemanlab.org/2011/12/tom-stites-layoffs-and-cutbacks-lead-to-a-new-world-of-news-deserts/. But is it really so naive to think that a combination of private and public effort won't soon turn that desert into a beautiful garden again? One that's harder to navigate, I'll grant you that, but nothing we can't overcome.

And anyway, local news monopolies have always had their disadvantages too: 

* Once a monopoly, commercial news organizations have no incentive to go beyond "good enough to sell ads against". Look at the business directory most local newspapers publish online, and you'll see exactly what that means. It's not pretty.
* Merchants and venues pay a steep price for getting the word out there. Newspapers charge businesses to put up daily deals, advertise a job, or promote a lunch special. These messages help businesses, but they also help consumers, so there's no need for a middleman to rack up profits by selling attention that readers gladly provide if the message is relevant.
* Everyone's talking about paywalls again. Local information is vital to communities, and since everyone contributes to that stream of information, everyone should have a right to it regardless of monetizational whims of a corporation.

But here I am blabbing on about simple stuff, when the question you really care about is: yes, but what with accountability journalism? What with fixing problems? What with accuracy and veracity? Let's split up the problem.

First off, let's not worry too much about the accuracy of our community calendar or the neutrality of a blogger's restaurant review. We still learn most about what's going on around us through rumor and water-cooler conversation, and so most people have gotten into a habit of working with information that is less than perfectly reliable. And in any case, community news is innocuous, there's no reason to cheat and mislead.

Then there's fixing problems. Although it may surprise you, governments actually welcome those conversations instead of wanting to see them silenced. There's been a surge of cities providing a platform for people to submit their everyday annoyances (potholes, noise, mess, voting on where to put bike racks) so they can get fixed. And many cities are experimenting with brainstorms on the web, where people can provide ideas for how they think the city can do a better job of serving them. It's not journalism and it won't expose any scandals, but only a professional journalist could think that investigative reporting is the only way to improve a community.

But you persist. Stop avoiding my question, you grumble, and tell me what watchdog journalism looks like in your techno-utopian post-newspaper world!

Well, it will look like watchdog journalism. I'd hope it tries to go beyond "hindsight journalism":http://stearns.wordpress.com/2012/05/16/hindsight-journalism/, only exposing corruption after the damage has been done, but in any case we need people keeping a watchful eye on the powerful.

But here's my question. If we "no longer need newspapers":http://steveouting.com/2010/04/01/re-mutterings-on-non-profit-news/ to broadcast events, to tell people about sales, for the weather report and milestones and obits. If we don't need news organizations for classifieds and business listings anymore. If Facebook and local newsletters fill in for the newspapers features reporting, and city blogs give us all the op/ed we need. If national newspapers give us our political coverage and IMDB provides our film reviews. If you published a paper devoid of all of that, how big do you think it would still need to be? A one-sheet four-page tabloid would do, I'd wager. (And in any case, you wouldn't have to _print_ it per se.)

Even if local newspapers are not the only road to a healthy community, they can still be a damn good one. Local newspapers have long been, and I contend can remain the cornerstone of the local information ecosystem. But if we're not to perish, we have to start picking our battles. Before someone else has to step in and "rescue the reporters":http://www.shirky.com/weblog/2009/10/rescuing-the-reporters/.