---
title: Big solutions to small problems
language: en
layout: post
categories:
    - business & management
summary: We look past low-hanging fruit so often it's ridiculous. But why?
---

So, you're interested in real-time analytics. Turning "big data":http://seekingalpha.com/article/441171-beware-the-hype-over-big-data-analytics into big insights. Eager to start using "machine learning":http://stdout.be/2011/07/18/machine-learning-fairy-dust/ to predict user behavior. Hold on now. Have you tried creating a custom report in Google Analytics yet. Ever done a simple funnel analysis in Google Analytics?

Your website is running slowly. Time for load balancers and 8-core dedicated machines, you say. You've thought about hiring a computer scientist to optimize your algorithms. Have you ever tried running YSlow!, perchance? Tried some basic caching instead?

Your new social network is not seeing the kind of user retention you'd like. You need a gamification strategy, for sure. Because of course you're sure that the basic value proposition is sound, no point in thinking that over.

Design is the new code, and your app is not as user-friendly as it could be. Time to free up the budget to "hire a top-tier UX strategist":http://stdout.be/2011/06/14/the-trouble-with-usability-experts/. Okay, but have you ever read Steve Krug's Don't Make Me Think, have you ever tried to do something with the simple tips in that $14 book?

I've seen it at every place I've ever worked before. I see it in blogpost after blogpost, conference after conference. Most unnervingly, it's a personal struggle, too. A universal virus.

Entire cottage industries have cropped op to exploit our infatuation with big solutions to small problems, and many a consultant cashes in on our collective credulity.

You could say that people have trouble seeing simple strategies, and that simple solutions are not easy to find. I'd agree, but my point is more subtle than that.

You could say that every company houses its fair share of dullards, and that the problem is stupidity. Well, yes, but there's more to it. (Also, did you just call me stupid?)

Part of it is simply a tendency to get excited about anything new and shiny. Or to just want to do something because it looks fun. Why do you think analytics dashboards scattered around the office on big TV screens are so popular? Be honest, have you ever seen anything more badass?

Avoiding frivolous decisions is a battle for everyone, and an impulse that is harder to fight now that the web is throwing new strategies, techniques and tools at us every single day. Knowledge isn't always a good thing.

I have this totally speculative theory that it might be more than infatuation with the shiny and new that's leading us to make stupid and expensive decisions. What I'm talking about is a weird psychological mechanism whereby someone is unwilling to entertain simple, battle-tested, common-sensical solutions out of a subconscious fear that they'd be seen as the kind of person who always comes up with dull solutions and bland strategies. Or the kind of person who has it easy, has only ever had to solve easy problems at work, and thus not suited to making an upwards career move.

Shlepping out six-figure numbers for unnecessary consulting contracts speaks to your abilities as a manager, because it is a social signal that you're the kind of guy who can responsibly handle that kind of money as well as the humility to know when you need to engage external expertise. Who cares about whether you really needed that advice in the first place?

I sometimes fear that we turn simple problems into complex ones, just to be able to showcase how adroitly we can solve them.

Or maybe I'm looking for an intricate explanation where an easy one will do. Maybe it's a widespread but mild form of cargo culting, of imitation without purpose. If Facebook is doing it, so should we. "Anticipatory socialization":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anticipatory_socialization of sorts.

We find magnificent solutions to minor problems. To our surprise, they never really work. But nevermind, there's always a next problem on the horizon, and another complex, expensive, big cheese solution waiting to be tried out.

Here's to boring solutions, low-hanging fruit, duct tape fixes and the "beginner's mind":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shoshin.