---
layout: review
language: en
categories:
    - business & management
title: The E-Myth Revisited
rating: great
amazon: gp/product/0887307280/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=stdoutbe-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399369&creativeASIN=0887307280
author: Michael E. Gerber
---

It's been a couple of years ago now, at the height of my love and appreciation for self-help literature, that I read Michael Gerber's "E-Myth":http://www.e-myth.com/. Horrible title, but Neil Giarratana had heartily recommended it during one of the best talks at a technical conference in Washington DC, so I just felt like I had to pick it up.

In one pithy sentence, the book's advice is that you should work _on_ your business, not _in_ your business. You should run your business, any business, like a franchise. Why like a franchise? Because franchises have a reliable, repeatable business strategy. Franchises have procedures that decide how everything gets done, and in the process of learning more about your business, you can tweak those procedures until they're just right. Working on your business pays for itself ten times over. Working in your business is only worth as much as the time you put in, and nobody survives years and years of 80-hour workweeks so many small business owners feel they ought to put in.

Build a better business, don't build everything that leaves your shop. Embrace your inner manager, so to speak.

The E-Myth is a book for small-business entrepreneurs, but I like to think it is just as poignant for those of us who don't have our own business and don't want to start one either, because the essence of the book is really about _what modern businesses are like_. 

The 20th century was one big effort to turn work from something that just happened into something predictable and organized. Hierarchies keep the boss from having to keep an eye on every stupid little thing, and structure and procedures are the very things that allow a manager to _manage_.

We've all gotten used to disparaging the corporation and its endless layers of middle management, the pointless meetings, the meddling human resources department. What Michael Gerber does is explain it to us like "Frederick Taylor" would've done it a hundred years ago: with boundless excitement and convinced that it would make everyone's life much, much easier.

Really, if you think about it, a process-driven culture _can_ bring out the best in people. If employees never have to worry about the little things like what they should start on first thing in the morning, where documents should be stored away, how to talk to customers, when to call or when to e-mail a superior... so much mental energy that would have been spent on trifles can now be directed at stuff that's actually useful. That's as true for white collar jobs as it is for blue collar ones.

Heck, that's a wonderful nugget of inspiration even on a personal level: well-chosen routines and rituals allow you to glide through the boring parts of life on autopilot, leaving all your energy for the fun stuff.

So before you get ready to piss on Taylor's grave, think about it from that angle instead: don't make people think about the stupid stuff.

The trouble with a process- and rule-driven culture, of course, is that often it patently _does not_ bring out the best in people. It kills all innovation: workers are supposed to work, managers are supposed to manage, and permission to think is the privilege of the board and the executive team. In a franchise, if an employee has a great idea, she'll have to sell it to upper management through a carefully defined employee feedback process — of course you need a process for that! — instead of, y'know, just giving it a go, relying on your wits to correct course and trying something else if where you end up is not where you wanted to be. Which has led to the almost absurd situations that make up a reality series like "Undercover Boss":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Undercover_Boss and what makes that show so great to watch. Even if the modern workplace of the knowledge industry is not quite like a factory floor, everybody recognizes the kind of disconnect between what executives cook up and what the people doing the real work actually experience and know.

When do processes start killing creativity instead of enabling it? When is the trade-off not worth it anymore?

Moreover, isn't there something deeply unsatisfactory about building your business so that it reliably produces okay-ish results from okay-ish employees? Corporations, throughout the twentieth century, have thrived by cutting out risk and uncertainty. In the process, they've made it impossible for stupid employees to sink the company, but they've also made it impossible for bright people to make great stuff.

Aren't the businesses we appreciate most, like 37signals and GitHub in the software industry, or the Anchor Brewing microbrewery described with much love in Bo Burlington's book "Small Giants":http://www.smallgiantsbook.com/ exactly those that are very picky about hiring but afterwards let people free, inspiring them to produce great work by instilling employees with a sense of shared purpose at every level of the organization?

The challenge for 21st-century companies is to find ways to bring back some humanity and creativity to corporate life and cut the red tape without dismantling the structure that's keeping these businesses in business. Can we have our cake and eat it too?