---
layout: page
title: Putting news into context
---

Context is not rocket science.

The easiest and fool-proof way to provide context is simply _by providing context_. Create overview pages for big topics. Ensure your stories contain a good amount of hyperlinks, and refer back to previous coverage. Refer people to overviews and specials on your own site and elsewhere.

Most newspapers fail to provide adequate information for people new to a topic (and those who simply need a refresher or some bearings) is because they're not aware that day-to-day publishing is really a problem. Providing deeper coverage on an issue usually happens in Sunday newspapers and in carefully crafted specials. That's great, but context isn't _special_, it's what everybody except for the most ardent news junkies need to fully enjoy and understand the news.

The first step, then, to becoming a news organization that cares about context, is to make it a routine aspect of staff meetings and the story budgeting process. We'll repeat this comment later when we talk about community management: most newspapers could do so much more and it wouldn't require even the tiniest bit of innovation. Just that you care.

Once a newsroom has all its ducks in a row, mind you, there's all sorts of fun stuff we can do to be a better information provider. Here's some inspiration.

h2. Topic pages

Topic pages are a relatively recent phenomenon. They got started as unassuming archive pages, listing all content belonging to a specific category, like @conflict@ or @Ethiopia@. Anno 2011, most topic pages on news websites still consist of nothing more than a very short summary of the topic plus a big bunch of links.

Unfortunately Most topic pages just aren't very good. Take "Inside Higher Ed's topic pages":http://www.insidehighered.com/news/focus/admissions for one. They're but a small step above tag-based lists. The one thing they do well is bundling topics by sub-topic, which makes these pages not so overwhelming, as most topic pages are.

BBC's topic pages are more visually enticing ("example":http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-11727892), yet offer but scant context above a miserly tag-based list.

But while the majority of topic pages are bland and boring, some do manage to excite.

h3. The Hechinger Report

* http://hechingerreport.org/category/godeep/godeep_teacher_evaluations/ is pretty darn good content-wise: 
- an overview ("wiki") article
- curated links on top (and not just links, but WHY you have to read them — e.g. 'the series that sparked national debate')
- "more" links + key reports [other example of subdividing stories is Inside Higher Ed]

Design could bring out these different parts in a more engaging way (e.g. BBC), but the parts are there.

Also, the wiki-esque overviews should contain more visuals and items for quick scanners, like pro/con boxes or "X things you need to know".

These could also be the basis of user interaction: don't let them edit the whole article, but let them suggest new pros and cons, or link to new material you haven't included yet.

h3. Google's living stories

* http://livingstories.googlelabs.com/lsps/DCSchoolReform#OVERVIEW:false,false,false,n,n,n:null; Google's living stories are well-known but its lessons perhaps not as widely applied as they could be; the search-like interface with facets for time, genre, coverage on sub-issues and display of defining events is excellent topic page material.

h3. The Spokesman-Review

* http://www.spokesman.com/topics/mlk-bomb/ takes some of the lessons of Living Stories (or maybe it's just independent invention), like not just giving a tag-based list but presenting it more as a filterable search interface (all/top stories; by content type). It also displays key places and persons, which is a very nice touch and sometimes crucial in understanding an event. Also interesting is that they catalogue these places and persons *under* an event, because while sometimes you're interested to learn more about a person as a whole, the context you really need when you're exploring a topic is what that person means in relation to all these stories you're hearing about.

h3. The New York Times

* http://topics.nytimes.com/top/news/international/countriesandterritories/libya/index.html Good overview, though again perhaps somewhat content-dense (I like the fact that content-dense topic pages give them a wikipedia-like vibe, but I believe Google's approach of giving a couple of paragraphs of content, with a javascriptey "more" button for those who want more narrative content, will work better for a lot of users. Having to read a 2000-word summary to make sense of that 500-word story you were just trying to make sense of, just doesn't seem all that enticing.) "Headlines around the web" and "Libya navigator" (same, but links to resources) are very good additions; it's a *topic* page, not a tag page. The infobox ("General information on Libya") also helps in providing a quick way to get your bearings on a subject. "Area: 679,362 square miles, or slightly larger than Alaska." is a nice touch. Design-wise, though, the fact that the page doesn't use its full width is annoying.

h3. California Watch and The Voice of San Diego

* http://californiawatch.org/topic/higher-ed California Watch doesn't have topic pages per sé, but their entire navigation is based around topics; which is one answer to the question of how to integrate a topic page into a broader flow: don't fence them off into their own ghetto, but make them an integral part of how you browse the news.

The Voice of San Diego does this, to a certain extent as well, e.g. the beat page for education contains a sidebar with only content about recent layoffs: http://www.voiceofsandiego.org/education/#tncms-block-295683

h3. A dilemma

While working on topic pages, you'll be confronted with a certain dilemma. Tag-based lists plus some featured stories and a two-sentence summary is something you can do for just about any topic, and there's no justifiable reason for sticking to ugly archive-like pages when some minimal effort gives you so much more.

True resource page, on the other hand, are so much better but also so much more work. They require at least a Wikipedia-quality summary, a selection of photography, links to everywhere. Sometimes visualizations or their own application-like functionality. And after you make those pages, you have to maintain them into perpetuity.

Nobody will blame you for not having comprehensive topic pages on all of the topics you cover. Choose which topics to focus on, and go for "good enough" for the others.

h2. Series and specials

The web is its own thing, and allows you to do many things you simply can't do in print. But some tried-and-tested approaches from before the web carry over to news websites just fine. Series and specials are two formats that work well on the web, and I feel compelled to mention them even if they lack new media pzazz.

Series work, just like they do offline, because they build up momentum and allow you to split coverage of a multifaceted story into digestible chunks.

Specials work, just like they do offline, because they're a good way of getting readers to care about something they might otherwise skip over, and because they can attract new audiences that otherwise wouldn't bother with your brand. One-offs keep things peppy. ("Example":http://jacksonville.com/news/cityofhope.)

What's even better, is that unlike print journalists, we don't have to push all unique content or special efforts into the confines of a special or a series. We also have topic pages, news apps, interactive visualizations and video reports at our disposal.

Reporters together with their editors also have to be producers. Producers don't just write or film or code, they orchestrate an experience across platforms. That means choosing the right formats, deciding which content to reuse across platforms and which content to tailor for just web, print or mobile.

h2. Story trackers

Think of story trackers like topic pages, but for an individual story and its follow-ups. It's like the made-for-the-web cousin of a special, and a fairly new development in online journalism at that.

SBNation bundles follow-ups in what they call story streams ("example":http://philly.sbnation.com/temple-owls/2011/3/13/2048520/ncaa-tournament-bracket-2011-temple-villanova-penn-state), which you can subscribe to if you wish to follow a story as it develops.

The Guardian has "a more mature implementation":http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/blog/2010/jun/09/science-story-trackers. While SBNation publishes just a stream, a story tracker on The Guardian consists of a summary of the story so far, a list of all bundled stories, links to handy resources as well as a Q&A ("example":http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2010/jun/09/genetics-autism-story-tracker).

While story trackers don't provide the big picture that a topic page does, that's exactly their strength: they allow people to follow a specific story as it unfolds over the course of hours, days or weeks, through e-mail alerts, RSS feeds or by bookmarking the tracker page.

Story trackers can be used both to cover breaking news, but also, as The Guardian shows, to cover a larger issue, like the relationship between DNA and autism, over the course of years. You're free to use them as flexibly as you want.

Story trackers and topic pages are perfect complements. When follow-up stories are bundled together, you can avoid having a big mass of undifferentiated links on your topic pages, and instead show different lines of investigation. "Autism" could be the topic, whereas "DNA and autism" would be a bundle of follow-up stories, along with other potential bundles like "Special education for children with autism".
