It's been a ton of fun, these past two weeks, seeing Howard Owens, David Simon and Ryan Chittum arguing about paywalls and generally just acting like a bunch of small children. I've said it before and I'll say it again: journos are the worst comment trolls.

The discussion of whether readers ought to pay for journalism has always been a heated one. It has a hidden moral subtext: readers who don't pay are freeriders, and papers who charge are abandoning their service to the community to turn a quick buck.

 I think we can credit the New York Times' successfull paywall with making the discussion a little bit more nuanced among future-of-newsies, though I fear it has made it more unreasonable among everyone else, who now assume that because the newspaper with possibly the biggest brand equity of any paper in the world can make _some_ money with a "porous paywall":http://www.yelvington.com/content/thinking-about-paywall-read-first, it's the future of the entire industry.

Please "don't be naive":http://www.shirky.com/weblog/2009/03/newspapers-and-thinking-the-unthinkable/. The question is settled, and paywalls have been shown to work, "as Columbia Journalism Review blogger Ryan Chittum argues":http://www.cjr.org/the_audit/owenss_straw_man_army.php, and he's not wrong, but the thing is, be aware of Ryan's implicit definition of "to work": it brings in some pocket money, maybe it keeps print alive for a little bit longer. For an industry in decline, we shouldn't snuff our noses at any source of revenue, even if it's a small one. The trouble is that Ryan wants to argue, at the same time, that even if paywalls are a mild success (plus the attendant hidden costs) then that's good enough, because, by analogy, no-one would argue that news organizations getting into the events business is the devil's work because it only provides limited revenue and not the golden egg. But that's what makes Ryan Chittum so dishonest: he sees that free doesn't bring in the revenue we need to sustain our operations, says "Let’s try something different." and when people point out that the different thing he'd like to try will – with a couple of notable exceptions – only bring in pocket change if even that and thus won't solve our problems, he wavers between conceding the point ("This, of course, is hardly enough money to return to the salad days of newspapers," but it could grow and there's no reason to "leave on the table for no apparent reason.") and unwittingly jerking back to the old way of thinking about paywalls: we tried the free thing, now we need to try the paid thing, gladly joining David Simon in portraying anti-paywall people as those that will destroy the entire industry.

The idea that "readers have never paid for journalism" refers to the fact that majority reader revenue has never been what's kept newspapers in business. More realistically it paid for the paper, ink and delivery, but not much more. Perhaps that's different in smaller markets, but certainly not in the US and the UK.

The metered paywalls that have been shown to work are, if anything, innocuous. For the most prestigious and more business-oriented papers, they can bring in a substantial (though not a game-changing) chunk of money. For smaller papers, they can provide some revenue or they can lead to some small losses, and conversely not adopting a pay wall can lose you some money or it can give you some more time, brand equity or eyeballs that you can try to find interesting ways to profit from.

People on both sides of the fence have gotten a bit milder, and so arguments get confused because it's always easy to refer to older arguments by your opponent. So Ryan says that he never meant to say that subscriptions would or could form the only source of income of papers – but then that's what paywalls were originally about: lots of subscription income, advertising as long as we can keep it, and we can keep doing what we've always been doing. Nobody believes that anymore because, but people did. Now it's obvious that even the New York Times paywall isn't bringing in nearly enough money to make it profitable and to provide a nice buffer when advertising slows.

Conversely, Ryan thinks the essence of the anti-paywall people is that they think nobody will ever pay for anything, ever, and that paywalls will always drive away more pageviews (and thus ad impressions) than they could make up for in subscription revenues. He's right, that's what people used to think. That's not true, we now know, paywalls can bring in more money than they lose. Just not to a degree to merit the amount of attention news execs pay to them.

There's still a lot of quasi-religious zeal, as the latest (and otherwise very insightful) "debate between David Simon and Howard Owens":http://www.cjr.org/the_kicker/why_david_simon_is_wrong_about.php?page=all showed, but also more people trying to make sense of when paywalls can work and when they can't. Small countries with small language communities, "for example":http://www.niemanlab.org/2011/10/the-newsonomics-of-piano-media/. Financial news, like the Wall Street Journal and the Financial Times. Paywalls that "exploit freemium dynamics":http://steveouting.com/2012/06/08/its-not-a-paywall/.

Like Howard Owens, I dislike paywalls for a philosophical reason: you can't simultaneously argue that newspapers are central to democracy and then close them down, even if only partially, unless you pay.



What is more interesting to me, though, is why it's so hard to make money with media. Glut certainly has to do with it: supply goes up and prices go down. Unbundling too, which is making the cross-subsidization that defined our industry impossible. But that begs the question: why do we need to use profits from things that aren't news to fund things that are? There are not many but there are a few examples of things that hold value but that people somehow seem reluctant to pay for. We grudgingly pay half a buck for a public toilet visit. ... There are also a few examples of things that consistently provide a low value, but that we keep buying. ----

A part of me just thinks that the value proposition is wrong. Thinking about paywalls, then, to me is like thinking about. And the model is wrong. Does it really take 

Implementing a paywall, no disagreement with Ryan there, doesn't preclude you from innovating. But as a heuristic for figuring out which companies are throwing in the towel and have said "fuck it, we just don't get this digital bullshit," it works pretty well.

The reason I love the community around the future of news so much is because all of our sharing and writing and bickering has lead us to learn more about journalism – its practice and the business to support it – in the past five years than in the fifty that preceded it. And the paywall discussion is actually a good example of that: from blanket approval or disapproval in the late nineties to both more nuanced views on what can work and what cannot as well as more subtle, smarter implementations. Exactly how things should be.