* Amy Zerba: ironically, print may be better suited to short and to the point, and online for in-depth coverage (MY RIPOSTE: mind, the participants saying this don't like print, and so are saying that they want it to be more like the web, which may lead us off track -- similarly they say they want the front page to work like a TOC)

----
[Says what I want to say, but is just a bunch of notes glued together at this point, not a coherent post.]



* how the web has freed print from its shackles -- allowing us to create an experience that is complementary to the web 


The research also highlights how a feeling of belonging versus instability can determine which kind of news they're interested in. Long-time inhabitants of a certain neighborhood were, oddly enough, not always very interested in their environs or, due to an established social network, just not in need of newspapers to tell them about it. Conversely: 

bq. It is not uncommon for young adults in their 20s to move from place to place often, creating a feeling of instability. Because of this, younger residents may, arguably, know their surroundings and community less than someone who has lived in that community longer. The majority of the participants wanted more local news, and some of them especially liked it if people they knew were mentioned, which makes sense to me.

(A 2008 study by Pew Research Center showed the exact opposite, though, with young adults caring less for local news than other age groups. We need to figure out what makes the pendulum swing.)

In the same vein, a few participants in Amy's focus groups suggested that they'd appreciate a recap every once in a while: 

bq. [A] few participants in the youngest age groups mentioned wanting a wrap-up of events leading up to the week or at the end of the week. It would give news in small doses, and provides assurance that the younger adults have not missed any major news story.

Some weaknesses of print, though, are easily reshaped into advantages.

Young readers are used to multi-tasking when they read the news, which they can when they watch TV news and also when they read news online, but not with a magazine or newspaper in front of them. But what if you don't need print anymore to continually keep up with the news, but rather start consuming it as a way to learn more about your neighborhood, your country, science, economy and technology, more deeply and in a relaxed atmosphere?

Other participants in Zerba's research noted how newspapers really would be more useful if they were delivered at work, and — get this — if they contained just the minimal amount of knowledge to understand what's going on. "I think in the print edition you just want the headlines" said one. Why? Because — and this is even better — websites can fill in the background and analysis. Exactly the opposite of the consensus among media professionals that web is short and to the point, whereas print is a longform medium.

Not as surprising, but another thing the participants noted was:

bq. Several participants expressed displeasure at the thought of unread papers piling up, saying they feel guilty, it annoys them, and it is messy.

I get this. I've had the same experience with some of my magazine subscriptions before. But I also think there's a big big opportunity for print here: the web is endless, but in print you're guaranteed to have seen all the important stuff in a fixed, manageable amount of pages. (Of course, the impetus to sell more ads in times when demand was or is high has led many papers to beef up, which is not always to the benefit of the average reader.)

But it pays not to take that advice too literally: the people in the focus groups are young news consumers who read more online than in print. When you ask them how you could make a newspaper better, the interesting thing that happened — that's how I read it anyway — is that they tried to reinvent the internet on paper. Some of the focus group participants even suggested giving newspapers a big table of contents: a poor man's search engine, isn't it, if you think about it? That would definitely be one way to keep on "harvesting":http://www.dankennedy.net/2011/10/21/the-providence-journals-print-first-strategy/comment-page-1/#comment-65749 for just a little longer, but I for one would rather start looking for how we can create a newspaper that has something websites don't and can't have, with a new experience, new genres and a new information architecture.



 --- over Zerba's research, en hoe dat zeer handig advies geeft om kranten meer aan te passen aan wat hedendaagse nieuwsconsumenten willen (én al die adviezen oplijsten), maar ook opmerken dat zoiets je naar een lokaal maximum leidt, en er eigenlijk op gericht is om kranten meer van de goede eigenschappen van websites te geven, terwijl wat je op lange termijn eigenlijk wil doen is van kranten een formaat maken dat van die zwaktes (traagheid, een hoop papier) sterktes maakt (analyse, ontspanning, prestige, enkel 't belangrijkste)