---
layout: review
language: en
categories:
    - business & management
title: The E-Myth Revisited
rating: great
amazon: gp/product/0887307280/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=stdoutbe-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399369&creativeASIN=0887307280
author: Michael E. Gerber
---

It's been a couple of years ago now, at the height of my love and appreciation for self-help literature, that I read Michael Gerber's "E-Myth":http://www.e-myth.com/. Horrible title, but Neil Giarratana had heartily recommended it during one of the best talks at a Drupal conference in Washington DC, so I just felt like I had to pick it up.

Pithily summarized, the book says that you have to work _on_ your business, not _in_ your business. You should run your business, any business, like a franchise. Why like a franchise? Because franchises have a reliable, repeatable business strategy and they all develop strict procedures for how everything gets done. 

The E-Myth is a book for small-business entrepreneurs. Its goal is to help your design agency or bakery or indie music label or small hotel to be better at what it does, while simultaneously getting you in the kind of position where you feel like you can take a moment to relax instead of having to slave away for 80 hours a week to accomplish anything at all. Procedures and rules can do that for you. Being involved in every decision and helping to craft or build every product that leaves your shop does not. Embrace your inner manager, so to speak.

But I think the book is just as poignant for those of you who don't have your own business and don't want to start one either, because the essence of the book is really about _what modern businesses are like_. When a business has grown too large to easily know what's going on in every team, good personal relationships and professional respect aren't enough anymore to keep your company going. Indeed, structure and procedures are the very things that allow a manager to _manage_.

A process-driven culture can bring out the best in people. Because employees never, ever have to worry about the little things like what they should start on first thing in the morning, where documents should live, how to talk to customers, when to call or when to e-mail a superior... so much mental energy that you used to spend on trifles can now be directed at stuff that's actually useful. That's a wonderful nugget of inspiration even on a personal level: well-chosen routines and rituals allow you to glide through the boring parts of life on autopilot, leaving all your energy for the fun stuff.

It might sound like a platitude to you, but I think it's a powerful lens through which to look at today's business world.

The trouble with a process- and rule-driven culture, of course, is that often it patently _does not_ bring out the best in people. It kills all innovation: workers are supposed to work, managers are supposed to manage, and permission to think is the privilege of the board and the executive team. In a franchise, if an employee has a great idea, she'll have to sell it to upper management through a carefully defined employee feedback process — of course you need a process for that! — instead of, y'know, just giving it a go, relying on your wits to correct course and trying something else if where you end up is not where you wanted to be. Which has led to the almost absurd situations that make up a reality series like "Undercover Boss":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Undercover_Boss and what makes that show so great to watch. Everybody recognizes the kind of disconnect between what executives cook up and what the people doing the real work actually experience and know.

But when do processes start killing creativity instead of enabling it? When is the trade-off not worth it anymore?

And isn't there something deeply unsatisfactory about building your business so that it reliably produces okay-ish results from okay-ish employees? Corporations, throughout the twentieth centuries, have thrived by cutting our risk and uncertainty. In the process, they've made it impossible for stupid employees to sink the company, but they've also made it impossible for bright people to make great stuff.

Aren't the businesses we appreciate most, like 37signals and GitHub in the software industry, or the Anchor Brewing microbrewery described with much love in Bo Burlington's book "Small Giants":http://www.smallgiantsbook.com/ exactly those that are very picky about hiring and somehow manage to install a sense of shared purpose at every level of the organization?

The challenge for 21st-century companies is to find ways to bring back some humanity and creativity to corporate life and cut the red tape without dismantling the structure that's keeping these businesses in business. Can we have our cake and eat it too?