Humans are storytellers. It's in our genes.

The stories we value most are about what's going on around us and what's happening in the world at large.

Those two facts make a reporter's job so damn appealing. Telling stories is (a) just wonderful and (b) has a bit of prestige to it. Which leads people to be storytellers and sometimes journalists even if they're not getting paid, or not getting paid all that much. It also leads so many of us to consider a career in a field that can be so grueling.

As a result of journalism's natural appeal, though, there are a lot of journalists around. The more there is of something, the less you can get for it. Journalists don't earn a lot of money because there are so very many of them. But it's worse than that. Writing (and telling) comes so naturally to us that most people are willing to do it for free or for very little money. That's why blogs have exploded, why people use twitter and internet forums and why every organization you can possibly think of has its own newsletter. If you decide you want to make writing your profession, it's always kind of like making your hobby into a job. Because of writing's ubiquity, its economic value drops yet more.

Therefore, journalists will never be able to make a lot of money.

A lot of news organizations won't either. A big chunk of new news orgs that have seen the light of day in the past five or ten years are borne out of idealism and passion, fostered by people who'd keep on working even if they weren't getting paid anything at all.

When we ask ourselves the question of why it seems so difficult to fund (some kinds of) news organizations, the first clue then, is that most weren't started as businesses, not really. There may have been some gap in the coverage that these entrepreneurial journalists are trying to fill. Some perceived lack in reporting standards that needs immediate remedial action. But a gap in reporting isn't, in fact, by definition also a gap in the market. And that's where it goes wrong.