THE AUDIENCE DILEMMA

A decent amount of the metrics news organizations keep track of have nothing to do with making money. Instead, they're about audience insight: what browser they use, what screen sizes are most popular, where they come from. Stuff that you can turn into hypotheses for how to improve your website, or maybe even to guide editorial decisions: 

* What if, for every story you've ever done, you can instantly pull up an estimate of how many people in your audience have seen it? You can use that to determine what level of pre-existing knowledge to assume while you're writing. If you have per-visitor stats (and again, you can uniquely identify anonymous readers too) you can even show/hide an intro paragraph based on that user's history. Or you can set goals for how many people should know about an important story, and just keep writing about it until you reach that quota.

But it can be really hard to decide what needs improvement, what are simply properties of your audience that you just have to deal with, and when those properties don't cut it and you need to find a new market segment altogether, or expand that audience. Be aware that whenever you're looking at numbers, you have that choice: you can interpret it as a given, that is, as audience insight that helps you build your experience around, or you can interpret it as a metric that needs improvement (But if you can, do more research.)

If you're running a metro paper and see that you get almost no traffic from outside of the big cities. Well, obviously, the point of rural places is that not a lot of people live there, but maybe, even if you correct for that, your audience is still disparately city-based. Now you can make two decisions: do I try to attract that audience and focus editorial and marketing efforts on them, do I take the very opposite approach and give up on writing unprofitable pieces about Bumfuck, Egypt, or do I just keep doing whatever I'm doing? All three approaches can work really. Sometimes it's a matter of picking the identity you're comfortable with, the kind of publication you want to be. Sometimes it's something that needs testing.

* Change things up to attract new users, but be careful not to throw away the things that attract your core audience in the first place. Metrics can tell you what to fix but they can also tell you what you're dealing with. An audience that predominantly only visits 2 or 3 pages a visit, that may be something you desperately need to change but it might also be just the kind of user you're dealing with (and have to deal with!) and instead you should worry about improving other metrics by creating a better experience for the users you have. A/B-tests can sometimes show you whether a different experience attracts a different sort of user (and chases away another kind of user) and then you can analyze the attractiveness of each audience, and decide from there what audience to prioritize. For example, you may be obsessing about getting more pages per visit, but maybe that's not how it works, maybe lots of short visits from a loyal audience is much more valuable than hour-long visits from people who check back irregularly.