[don't make this one longer than it has to be; the crux of the issue can be summed up in a couple of paragraphs]

There's two kind of analytics. One kind tells you how well you're doing. The other kind tells you what your users are like, so you can figure out how to do better.

Knowing what browsers are popular among your users doesn't tell your anything about your business, but it tells you something about what browsers to design for to give your users the best possible experience, and that in turn helps your business.

We usually don't, which is a pity, but you could even use analytics to directly guide editorial decisions.

Look at your search logs to see what people are looking for but are not finding: that's what you should write about. Or figure out how much your audience knows about a topic like the Phone hacking scandal by calculating the percentage of your users that have read through one or more stories about it. Maybe even show them different content depending on whether they have or not, sort of like what Google News does.

Here's the trouble, though: whether something is a performance metric or audience insight is a decision that's up to you, not something the stats will tell you.

If you want to rank high on particular search terms, then that's a performance metric. But maybe you don't think SEO is that important, and instead you just want to find out how people end up on your site and how you can serve them.

If you're pushing your mobile and iPad apps, you're hoping those numbers will go up. Most smaller papers just want to know for how much longer they can still ignore mobile. And that makes total sense: there's no point in catering to an audience that does not exist.

We've had that problem since before the web, of course. If you're a metro paper and hardly anybody outside of the big cities subscribes to your paper, should you write _more_ stories about rural places or less? Go for efficiencies or grow new markets?

Sometimes it's a question of identity: you want to build your business on top of a certain kind of user and that's that. If you're not getting the kind of user you want, then you need to suck it up and change strategy. Startups do that all the time. You figured your social network wasn't going to take off, so instead you turn it into a couples app. Consumers won't pay the bills for what you're building, so maybe you should put a new spin on your application and schlep it to Fortune 500 companies instead.

(This is why cohort analyses are so useful: they tell you how new features affect new users versus how they affect old-timers. The results may be wildly disparate for both groups. This is also why AB-testing and partial feature roll-outs are so powerful: you can figure out how people like something without having to commit.)

Let me give you one piece of advice though. Don't build a product for an audience that doesn't exist. You can craft a news product geared for long-form reading, and evaluate your success by how long people stay on your site or app to read. Or you can craft a news product that tries to fit into people's daily routines. But if you're going to try and build both at once, you might be in trouble: the vast majority of all news consumption is during work hours, and that is not and will never be an audience that sticks around for much longer than a couple of minutes.

Arguably, most news organizations have been around for long enough to have built a loyal audience. You should do everything you can do make that audience happier and keep them around. Just make sure that, in the process, you're not trying to change them and slowly but surely scare them away. If most of your audience comes through social media and only reads a single page before leaving, then don't pout about lack of engagement or about how that doesn't fit your grand strategy. Use that knowledge and take advantage it of. Picking favorites and going after one specific audience segment is perfectly okay, smart, even, but be prepared to learn about your audience too, and listen to what they're saying.

You may be obsessing about getting more pages per visit, but maybe that's not how it works, maybe lots of short visits from a loyal audience is much more valuable than hour-long visits from people who check back irregularly.