---
title: Think like a statistician
language: en
layout: post
categories:
    - journalism
    - business & management
summary: Digging through data is easy. Knowing whether what you've found actually means something is not. So think like a statistician.
---

This poll is bullshit. That longitudinal study doesn't make any sense. I bet you've never thought about these confounding variables, but they make your precious theory void.

When we hear about a statistician, it's usually because they've just told someone that _they're wrong_. And I kind of like that. In fact, I think we could all use a little bit more of that skepsis.

Here's three questions I figure a statistician would ask of his data. These lessons apply to pretty much any kind of data, but let's take web metrics as an example.

h2. Can you separate signal from noise?

h3. spikes, slow metrics and stochastic noise

(one-time reports and studies are undervalued too; also think about presentation: is the absolute number important or the growth, or x/y or...)

h3. aggregates are the devil's instrument

take very specific metrics, and preferably for single users or subsets of people, not everyone (aggregates make us see but at the expense of throwing out information, and most people have the balance wrong). Distributions are important, so are cohorts.

h2. Do you have cause and effect figured out?

h3. Get rid of confounding variables

Again, by being specific and trying to find metrics that can easily be linked to a certain project, department, ...

h3. Experiments beat rationalization

h2. Are you tracking what you think you're tracking?

h3. Numbers don't always measure what you want them to measure

so don't overread them

right level of detail is important to separate signal from noise but also to make sure that the signal is the kind of signal you're looking for

h3. Pick your proxies carefully