---
layout: post
language: en
categories:
  - personal
  - tech & society
title: Destroying reality, one filter at a time
---

Applications like Hipstamatic and Instagram work by playing a trick on our mind, but in a good way. When we look at a painting or a drawing, we try to appreciate it in its own right, not by judging its verisimilitude. But when we look at a photo, any photo, and its uncanny resemblance to reality, it's easy to judge the image by how close it is to reality rather than by how _beautiful_ it is. So you're disappointed in the awful color balance, or upset that your cheap phone flash has made all your friends look like zombies yet again. Instagram and its kin, by making a photo look _so bad_ that comparing it to reality would be a travesty, gets us to look at the moment in time the photograph actually represents. The people, not how they look. Your surroundings, not whether you actually got the black point and contrast right.

Deliberately degrading the image quality of a photo "annoys some people's sensibilities":http://koralatov.com/post/3603212545/photos, but it shouldn't. Photo filters encourage us to take photos even if we know they'll turn out ugly, because how they look is no longer the point: they all look good and artsy albeit in a generic way. It allows you to take holiday snapshots without having to be apologetic about really knowing nothing about photography. People are never embarrassed about their phone pics, and that's fantastic.

Hipstamatic pics are great. But I appreciate photos from a Holga or Diana camera even more. They reintroduce a physical element to taking pictures. Handling the film. Knowing that it's not only you that can mess up a photo — just as often it'll be the camera. Reveling in the sheer randomness of those cheap components. And the feeling of mastery when you get back those developed shots and find a couple of gems amongst a bunch of crappy ones.

Yet I love my DSLR too, because I know I can take photographs in the most demanding situations, with hardly any light and everybody moving around, and they'll still come out looking great. And thanks to my Sigma 50mm f1.4, have gorgeous "bokeh":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bokeh — a photo manipulation if anything ever is, except that it happens right in the lens, not in a digital circuit.

I think we're lucky to live in a time where we can take instant shots with a digital reflex camera that look superb, capture exactly we want to capture, and have gorgeous amounts of detail. I think we're even luckier to live in a time where we can purposefully choose to ignore those qualities, grab a smartphone, take a crappy picture and love it for what it is.