---
layout: comment
title: You don't deserve to be paid for that
canonical: http://wpdavis.com/trunk/you-dont-deserve-to-be-paid-for-that/comment-page-1/#comment-517
context: Will Davis feels there's nothing wrong with unpaid internships. Your employer has to guide you, mentor you and make sure you don't do anything stupid and you can't expect to be paid for a learning experience. Fair 'nuff, but I contend most internships aren't like that at all.
---


I’ll have to disagree here, Will. Not because I disagree that in the scenario you focus on – people who know absolutely nothing but want to learn – interns don’t deserve pay, but because that scenario is not descriptive of the vast majority of interns and internships out there.

People in their senior year at J-school. People who do internships after graduation because the job market is so tight and they need to pad their resume. People who do internships because some newspapers only employ people who’ve been an intern before. People that could actually use some mentorship but instead get to do all the shitty little jobs with zero educational value because the employer figures that getting that college credit is enough of a reward in itself, even it if doesn’t represent learning. Really, how many newspapers do you think spend any time coaching their interns, beyond a little copy editing?

I’m happy to believe the Bangor Daily News is better about it than many other papers, but have you never heard anyone in the hallways say “oh, we’ll have an intern do that” when someone complains about a particularly awful piece of drudgery. Have you never seen an editor divvy up the assignments in such a way that even very bright interns get dull routine assignments time and time again?

That’s the problem: either give interns a genuine educational experience or give them money. But don’t pretend to do the former so you can avoid the latter.