---
layout: page
title: Better news through design
---

Ultimately, it's all about the content. But it's good design and information architecture that'll make sure people stay engaged and don't quit your site prematurely

* because they did a search for something and ended up with a dizzifying amount of links to only semi-relevant content
* because your type is so small and your pages load so slowly
* because they would have been eager to learn more about a topic, but didn't know they could

Design makes sure your efforts to be a better information provider aren't for nothing.

h2. This story, at a glance

* reporting/design: nut-graph-like "why you should care" sidebar, with a personal touch (it's called "from the reporter"): http://www.voiceofsandiego.org/public_safety/pavement/article_a0679a66-483b-11e0-86cb-001cc4c002e0.html
* HuffingtonPost's quick-read functionality

h2. Signaling importance through design

Stacy Lynch asserts that "Web sites have not yet perfected adequate, immediately-understandable, non-verbal ways to send signals to users about a story's importance or meaning." <cite>Stacy Lynch with Vivian Vahlberg, Sunny Oh, and Won-joo Yun, How to Become “Easy to Use” Online, 2009, p. 10</cite>

And indeed, the only effort we usually make to distinguish important from not-so-important stories is by giving some more prominence than others on our website's front page. That's not enough, and it's also not permanent: once the story gets kicked off the front page, its relative importance is lost.

h3. Major breaking news is not a routine follow-up

News comes in different flavors, not only in terms of genre but also depending on timing: breaking news, updates, corrections, follow-ups and retrospectives.

One of the first mistakes we make is not displaying which is which. Readers who click on updates to long-running stories while knowing nothing about the back story can quickly get frustrated.

First off, they shouldn't have ended up there: the front page or search page should have given them the alternative option to go to the   But secondly, if you're serious about your topic pages and are thinking of maybe implementing the story trackers we've talked about, then you shouldn't just tuck them away somewhere.

Try it, click on any New York Times story and see how long it takes you to find out if there's any previous coverage on the story, and where you can click to go to relevant topic pages.

h3. Make special coverage special

One of the marvels of news websites, as opposed to print, is that you get to use the _exact same template_ to display every single news story. It's cost-effective. By its sheer consistency it also focuses the attention on  content rather than ornament, which is not a bad thing.

That said, most news websites have completely given up on doing custom design, which has a weird side-effect: specials don't _look_ special and carefully constructed infographics and timelines get dumped somewhere near the end of a story. Just another blip on the news radar.

Any newspaper doing something special with its coverage, but not putting a commensurate effort into design, is throwing a party with the lights switched off.

"The Money Meltdown":http://www.themoneymeltdown.com/ probably won't win any design awards, but it is nevertheless a good example of how news design can work. The Money Meltdown features a concise layout perfectly tweaked to the subject, not just a one-size-fits-all design.

Take a look at Johan Ronsse's "year in review":http://v2.wolfslittlestore.be/2009/music.php mini-website for a more graphical take.

h3. Flexible layouts

Web design could still learn a thing or two from print. Like good use of templates, and combining templates to create great layouts. No, when you have to put out a newspaper every single day, you're really not going to get all fancy with the design. But you can give the impression that you are: most newspapers' designers have access to a library of anywhere between 5 and 50 story templates and more templates for infoboxes, advertising, photos and more, all ready to be used.

Maybe news websites should experiment with at least using a couple of different designs, depending on the story's topic, length, medium or other criteria. Do your blog pages look identical to news stories, for example?

The same lesson can be applied to topic pages. Too often, every topic page looks alike, even though the content is really not similar. Libya's 2011 revolution really requires the timeline and a big map of the area to be at the forefront, whereas for a topic page about standardized testing maps are inconsequential. Creating a bespoke design for every topic page would really stretch the limits of your staff, and could also be troublesome when you decide to create a new design for your website. Instead, you need a toolbox of widgets to play around with and arrange, customize and size as you please, and a topic page design that's flexible enough to account for differents kinds of information. Quick and cost-effective customization.

h2. Indulge the wikipedia reflex

* present information about who/what's being talked about inline (cf. my Apache sketches), per-paragraph; Apture is okay but this is better
* As we mentioned earlier: don't be a walled garden

h2. Declutter!

* Putting too much stuff on a page (it's so tempting, especially in those sidebars and on the front page!) doesn't help you sell things and it doesn't generate more clicks. Readers get used to it ridiculously quick, and start ignoring everything but the little islands of content they're interested in. This goes for advertising as well: if you want people to see it and click on it, you have to be careful about their placement.

<nav class="prevnext">
    <a href="relevancy" class="previous">relevancy</a>
    <a href="conclusion" class="next">conclusion</a>
</nav>