h2. Personalization

[Also not about context, but about relevancy]

Personalization has been around for much longer than most of the recipes on this page. It used to be a hot topic in the years after the new millenium. Many news sites experimented with customizable front pages, personal widgets, à-la-carte e-mail digests and more. Yahoo! and Google did so too, the latter with its still-functional "iGoogle":http://www.google.com/ig.

But personalization was not to be. After quite a bit of experimentation, publishers found out a thing or two about human behavior.

(1) People care about a shared news experience, because news is more fun if you can talk about it with friends and colleagues. News is all about "things to be angry or pleased about, ways to signal your social status or your personality to others. So getting a stream of news that is different from other people's is a bug, not a feature." ("Neil Kandalgaonkar":http://www.quora.com/Why-Did-X-Fail/Why-have-personalized-news-startups-failed#ld_Q8CzJl_2100)

(2) People just won't spend the effort to customize things to their benefit, even if it would end up providing them with a better experience. This is called "the paradox of the active user":http://www.useit.com/alertbox/activeuserparadox.html.

bq. "The news" is more about a shared experience; 

* history (used to be hot)
* problems (people like a shared news experience; people don't like to configure anything)
* new approaches: subtle but powerful, zero-effort personalization (sometimes called "light personalization")
  http://www.quora.com/Why-Did-X-Fail/Why-have-personalized-news-startups-failed
  http://www.networkworld.com/news/2008/071008-yahoos-coke-project-adds-life.html
  
  e.g. taking into account editorial judgment (leading story), your interests (follow topics or track stories, as mentioned above), where you live (provide information from nearby), how popular the story is and how old it is... order stories, but constructing the rating calculations in such a way that everybody sees about 50-70% of the same content anyway, to keep the shared experience intact.